I want to welcome you to Introduction
to Data Modeling and Connectivity.
I'd like to introduce Steve Minehr.
Good morning.
Thank you for coming.
My name's Steve Minear.
I'm a WebObjects engineer.
I don't have any songs for you today
like some of our other sessions,
sorry about that,
but my mother is Canadian, if that helps.
So, as an introduction,
we're going to talk about
two major things today.
First, using EOModeler to map relational
data into Java objects.
And then secondly,
we'll be talking about the JDBC adapter,
which is our main
adapter for WebObjects 5.
So, before we get going,
can I ask how many people have used
WebObjects and used EOModeler before?
Can you raise your hand?
Okay, so most of you have seen this.
This is an introductory talk,
so there might not be
that much new for you.
If you need some extra coffee,
you can grab it now.
Come back for the second half and
find out about the JDBC adapter,
which is new for WebObjects 5.
Okay, what you'll learn.
We'll talk about, first of all, model,
what a model is,
how it contains entities, attributes,
and relationships,
and we'll explain how you
create those and what they mean.
And we'll talk a bit about
fetch specifications,
which is how you query the database,
pull objects into your application.
We'll talk about entity inheritance,
how to model inheritance,
some of the pros and cons
involved in inheritance.
And finally,
we'll talk about the JDBC adapter.
This slide,
if you went to the introduction
to Enterprise Objects Framework,
this slide is supposed to encapsulate
that whole hour in one slide.
Okay?
So at the top,
we have a database view of data.
So that cylinder is a...
tabular data we have rows and columns in
there so we're using Neo model to define
how we translate from the tabular data in
the database into our object and that's
matching up columns into attributes and
taking the rows and creating dictionaries
first and then into real enterprise
objects so the what we're trying to
suggest there is we have to do some
type coercion to go back and forth from
the database native types into the proper
Java types and the types that we use
in EOF and web objects and finally at
the end we get the EO and the EO is
enterprise object is what you want to
interact with it'll be living in an
editing context and for most web object
applications all you have to worry about
is your EOs you're not too worried about
your database but we're talking about
in this talk how we set up the model
to do this mapping so you don't have
to think about it anymore once you're
once you're writing your application code
So what is an EOModel?
Well, it's, if you're familiar with
entity relationship diagrams,
it's a tool that,
or a model is an object that
does the mapping for you.
It describes both the relational
data and the object that you want to
transform that relational data into.
We declare entities,
which does a mapping from a particular
table into particular objects.
The connection dictionary defines
how you make that connection
to your particular datasource.
And we'll talk more about what goes
in a connection dictionary later.
Stored procedures are
also declared in a model.
There are places where you can use
your database's stored procedure
to fetch rows back from the
database and create EOs that way.
Or sometimes you might
want to be doing deletions.
So if you're using a special lead
or some special logic that's already
been encapsulated in your database,
you need to use that because whoever
controls the database doesn't want to
give you direct access to the tables.
And finally,
we have named fetch specifications.
So a model can contain
pre-built fetch specifications.
And if you went to the
introduction to EOF talk,
you learned more about
fetch specifications.
We'll talk about how our
EOModeler tool can help you
create those fetch specifications.
You already know how to use them
if you went to the other talk,
and we have a lot more information
in our documentation about
using fetch specifications.
All right,
so for our first demonstration,
we're going to bring up Ernest Kim,
and he'll be running EOModeler just
to give us a view of our sample data.
So for this first view,
we're showing a diagram view.
We'll get into more details
about EOModeler in a minute,
but just give us something
concrete to talk about.
We've created a very small database,
just a few entities and
a few relationships.
The idea here is we have a course entity,
which represents a course that
someone's teaching in school.
There's some professor who's
the instructor for that course,
and then there are students
who are enrolled in the course.
This diagram view is showing,
first of all, the different entities,
which are in the boxes,
the attributes that
belong to those entities,
and then the arrows are
suggesting the relationships
between the different entities.
There's a lot more you can
do in the diagram view.
You can control which things are labeled,
which attributes are being viewed.
There's different ways you can
filter this and save layouts.
But for our purposes right now,
I think this gives you a general idea
of what we're going to be talking about,
and when we do something concrete,
you'll understand that we just
have a few entities involved.
There's also some inheritance.
This person is really an abstract
superclass or abstract entity
that some of the other entities,
the student and professor,
are going to inherit from.
We just want to show you
that for inheritance.
This might not be the way you design
your school administrative system,
but it'll give you a suggestion
of what you can do in EOModeler.
So what is an EO entity?
Well, at the basic level,
we map a table into a class.
So you have a database
with your rows and columns,
and you have a Java class.
You have to declare how you take
that raw data and turn it into an EO.
Then EOF does all the work for you.
So there are various aspects and
settings you can put on an EO entity.
First, you can mark it abstract.
Abstract means that you're never
going to actually instantiate
an object of this class.
It's just there principally
for inheritance.
There can be a parent entity.
Again, if you're using inheritance,
one entity can inherit from another.
It'll get all the attributes
from the parent entity.
The restricting qualifier allows you to
filter the rows from a particular table
when you're fetching your entities.
So we also use this when
we're modeling inheritance.
Basically, instead of saying,
"My entities are every row in
this table," we put some kind of
qualifier on that and it restricts
it to a subset of those rows.
We'll talk about that
during the demonstration.
You can also mark an entity as read-only.
Depending on your application,
that might speed things up a little bit.
That means we'll never be
writing anything to that entity.
It's really just there for some
kind of bookkeeping purposes.
You've already pre-built everything.
And you can cache an entity.
That changes the behavior of
EOF a bit where we know we have
everything in memory that we need.
We can do searches in memory instead
of going to the database all the time.
But the last two are used
just in special circumstances.
In general, your entities will not be
read-only and won't be cached,
and you'll be wanting to write
data back to the database.
All right,
so let's go back and look at EOModeler
and we'll take a closer look at entities.
So this is the way we
typically open up EOModeler.
The model name is at the
top left of the tree view.
Then we have a list of
entities down below.
Over to the right we have a table
which declares the entity names,
what table it goes to,
and what kind of class
you want to instantiate.
And by default we'll give
you an EOGeneric record,
which is our convenient holder of data.
It has no particular business logic.
In most of your applications
you'll be creating your own
special class to hold your EOs,
and you'll have some business
logic associated with that.
Okay, so now we've selected the course.
So in the course you can see a list of
entities and relationships to the side.
We'll talk about those more in a minute.
I like to browse some data.
So what Ernest just did,
he clicked on the icon that looks
like a database cylinder with a
little magnifying glass on it.
So that's browsing data.
This is a good way just to
test that your data is there.
You set up your model.
It's an immediate validation that things
look right for talking to your database.
And you can see what kind of
values you have in the database.
Here you can also,
just for your convenience,
you can have a qualifier
and filter this list.
So if you have a lot of data and
you just want to take a look,
see what's in there,
you might do some experiments here.
So Ernest is adding a qualifier,
title like F*.
So star is the wild card.
So now you see there's only one course in
their formal logic which matched that F*.
You can wipe that out,
have an unqualified query,
and we'll get all the classes.
So for our demonstration here,
we're only using two classes.
It's a very small database.
Let's show the inspector on the class.
So this is the first panel.
There's multiple panels
in our inspectors,
and it really pays for you to
spend some time playing EOModeler.
Make sure you go to the inspector on all
the different types of model objects.
There's lots of settings you can
change in the different inspectors,
and it's worth spending a little time
experimenting and getting to know
what all those different things mean.
So in this first panel,
We have the name, the table name,
the class.
Those are all immediately
available anyway in the table view.
and then we have a
list of the properties.
And this is just another way of editing.
You can do all this work
in the table view also.
We'll talk about the different
properties a bit later.
So now we're looking at
the professor entity,
and we're looking at the second panel,
the advanced entity inspector.
And this entity uses inheritance.
So the first thing you can
notice is in the parent box,
We've selected person and there's a
little mark there indicating that the
person is the parent for the professor.
All your other entities will be
listed here and only one of them
will be selected as parent or
maybe none if you have no parent.
And then the other thing is because
of the way we're setting up our
table with single table inheritance,
which we'll talk about later,
we have a restricting qualifier.
So when we fetch
The professors out of the database were
going to be hitting the person table,
and we're only interested in rows that
satisfy this qualifier where ptype = 1.
So an EO entity contains, first of all,
a whole list of EO attributes.
And each attribute is mapping
a column into an instance
field of your Java object,
or an IVAR if you're
used to the Objective-C.
Now you have several
aspects to an EO attribute.
The first thing to consider is whether or
not this attribute is a class property.
A class property of your EO means
that when we fetch from the database,
we want to fetch this column
and create a corresponding value
in your EO for that column,
or for this attribute.
If it's not marked as a class property,
it's there so that we know what
to do when we're generating SQL,
but it's not declared
as part of your class.
Many things that you put in there,
especially foreign keys or primary keys,
you wouldn't want to mark as a class
property because it doesn't really
contribute to your business logic.
You're not going to be
using that value when you're
programming or creating your EOs.
But EOF needs the primary keys
and foreign keys for when we're
creating SQL and doing some of
the bookkeeping for you when we
write values back to the database.
So those attributes are declared,
but they're not marked
as class properties.
The next one is a primary key.
A primary key is a special
attribute that uniquely identifies
this row in the database or
this EO in your editing context.
We use the primary keys when
we're creating what we call a
global ID so that we always know
how to get to that EO again.
And again, when we're doing faulting,
we need to know that primary key so that
we know when we need to get this object,
we'll be able to go to
the database and fetch it.
So the next aspect is allows null.
And this corresponds directly to
what the databases allow you to do.
You can mark an attribute
whether or not it allows null.
If it allows null,
then if you don't set it,
we can write a null into the database.
In some cases,
you don't want to allow null.
You want to insist that your user
has set a value there or that your
application logic depends on having
some value in that attribute.
So you mark it, you leave it off so
it doesn't allow null.
The external type is the type
that the database is using.
It's the type name that's
specific to the database.
So Oracle might have a varchar2.
Not every database uses that
term for the external name.
So we need to know those external names
for when we're creating tables for you.
Most of the time,
if you've done reverse engineering,
you don't have to worry too
much about the external name.
But if you're switching from
one database to another,
your set of external
names might be different.
And it's worth knowing what database
you're talking to so that you get
those external names right and you
understand the details about the
meaning behind different external names.
Not every database treats even
the similar terms the same way.
The value class is the class
that you want this attribute
to be expressed as in your EO.
So when we talk about a
VARCHAR in the database,
the external type is VARCHAR, in your EO,
typically that would be a string.
So we have mappings for most
of the common value classes.
We'll declare something number and
map it to the appropriate number.
The value type is the other column
that helps us determine exactly,
in the case of numbers,
exactly what type of
number to instantiate.
So that might be a small i,
meaning integer.
Some things are ambiguous if we just
are saying we're mapping to number.
We need to create a
concrete class of number,
and the value type will help us do that.
There are also a couple of other
cases where the value type has special
meaning to a particular adapter.
But maybe these things are attributes,
aspects of attributes
that you use less often.
You can mark an attribute read only.
That means you don't
intend to ever modify it.
And we will, EOF will raise an error if
you do try to modify it.
You can have custom formatting.
So you can have special format
strings that define how you get the
values in and out of the database.
I think this is used less often.
But.
There may be some special cases where
the values were formatted a strange way,
and you really want to store and
retrieve things slightly differently.
The derived attribute is almost
a whole other kind of attribute.
Instead of mapping just directly
to some column in the database,
you can have a SQL expression.
So when you're fetching,
you can have some combination of logic
that is evaluated at the database,
and we pull a value out of that.
Usually, we can't update that value.
So if you have some kind of attribute,
say salary, which is multiplying some
monthly salary by 12,
you could have a SQL expression,
monthly star 12,
and we'll fetch that for you and do
the calculation on the database side.
So there can be an advantage there.
Or if you need some special
function that exists in SQL that
is inconvenient to program in Java,
you can do that with the SQL expression.
with a derived attribute.
Flattened attributes are attributes
that belong to a different entity,
but we've crossed a relationship to
get to this particular attribute.
And we want to think of this
attribute as belonging to our EO,
even though in our model we're actually
storing the value somewhere else.
So when we see more about relationships,
we'll see how that fits in.
But you can imagine an alias that
we've crossed one relationship,
we're getting the value
out of another table,
but we're storing it and treating
it in our Java object as if
it were directly part of that.
So it's a way of changing the model
to fit your application logic,
even though your database layout
may be a little bit different.
And Custom Value Class is a
capability for mapping the raw data
from the database into some more
sophisticated object that isn't,
well, that is defined by you
and your application.
It's not one of our standard
objects such as string or a number.
It's something that you're defining.
You want to do a mapping
from our raw data into that.
We're going to talk about that
more in a minute after the demo.
All right, so let's go back to EOModeler.
We'll go back to the computer.
Okay,
so we want to talk about attributes,
and we'll review some of the terms here.
So we've selected person,
and we see just three attributes.
The first thing,
the first column in the attribute
viewer is a little key icon.
I'm not sure if that's clear to everyone,
audience.
The key indicates that
this is a primary key.
And so we're using person ID.
And this is pretty typical, I think,
that you'll have some kind of number
or an integer as your primary key.
It's not a class property.
So the second column is that diamond,
is indicating which things are going
to be mapped directly into my EO,
what things can I use
for my business logic.
In this case, the person ID is really an
artifact of how we store data
in a relational database.
It's not something that
you need typically to worry
about in your business logic,
so we won't mark that
as a class property.
The next column is the locking bit.
This determines when we're
doing optimistic locking,
when we've made an update or about
to make an update to the database,
what values do we want to check
to make sure nothing's changed and
that we're safe to do this update.
So EOF, as you probably have heard
from the introduction to
Enterprise Object Frameworks on Tuesday,
keeps snapshots of all the data
that we fetch out of the database.
And things that are marked for locking,
we're going to check.
When you do an update,
we're going to check that all these other
things that you marked for locking are
still the same value in the database.
If someone else had changed
that row in the database and
we're about to update it,
our update will fail because
of the optimistic locking.
And that is determined by which
attributes you care about.
Most of the time,
you want to lock on all your attributes
because you want to be safe and make
sure that your application is only
writing data that it fetched and it's
in complete control of the database.
There may be some attributes
that you don't want to lock on,
particularly blobs or
any kind of large object.
It's very expensive to compare those.
It turns out we can't generate
SQL to do the comparison.
For normal attributes,
in our where clause,
we'll generate the SQL and make sure that
we're updating the right row for you.
But if you have something that's a blob,
a large kind of object in your database,
EOF is forced to pull
that all into memory,
do an in-memory comparison of that blob,
and then do the update to be safe.
And you don't normally want that.
It's really bad for performance.
So if you have anything that's large,
I would say don't mark it for locking.
Then we talked about the
value class and the first,
so we have string and number.
Number in Java is abstract,
so we have to...
Let's say something more particular
about what number to instantiate.
So the value type,
in this case we have a little i,
meaning let's transfer
this as an integer.
And we're inheriting this concept
really from our Objective-C days
where we needed more information here.
We're still doing the same
kind of thing in our models.
We're still storing some
Objective-C information even though
we're doing pure Java for our EOs.
The external type we talked about,
so we have two examples,
the VARCHAR and the number.
This is going against an Oracle database,
so the VARCHAR2 is the Oracle normal
type to use for VARCHAR.
Some different, depending on your type,
you might have a width or you
might have a scale and a precision.
There'll be other columns
you can fill out for those.
Just for your information,
when people first look at modeler,
sometimes they don't see everything
they want to see about particular
aspects of the attribute.
There's a little pop-up
menu down there to the left.
This controls what you see in EOModeler.
So as you can see, we can,
let's show allows null.
So now, that column there with the
zero is the allow null column.
You can make that disappear if
you don't want to view that.
Usually if setup allows null,
you don't need to look
at it all the time.
If you hit the delete key
when that column is selected,
it's being hidden.
We're not taking anything away.
We're just hiding it from you.
When you're first using EOModeler,
sometimes this is a bit confusing since
your model looked one way and you've
done some things to rearrange it.
It might not come back
the same way you expected.
Or you might not be able to find things.
If you get in that situation,
use the popup or use the inspector.
Most of these values are
available in the inspector.
So we talked a little bit
about the custom value class.
That's another aspect to an attribute.
And what this does is maps your
value into a particular class.
So this is at the attribute level.
This is just a value in the attribute.
This is not talking about an EO.
This is just a custom class for
holding some value of your attribute.
So if you're doing this,
you need to have a factory method.
So in this, this is an example.
It might be called,
if your class is called custom,
you might have a factory method
called custom with string.
The idea here is a string will be passed.
This is a string that we've
pulled out of the database.
We're passing it to your method.
Your method will give us back
one of your custom objects.
So you'll just map this in the inspector.
You need a conversion method,
so when we're writing things
back into the database,
we have your custom value.
EOF doesn't naturally know how
to put that into the database.
You'll tell us to use your method,
in this example, custom as string.
We will send custom as
string to your object.
Your object has to respond to
that and give us back a string.
Then we know how to put the
string in the database for you.
And the third aspect to a custom
value class is the init argument.
For the init argument,
we've been doing an example where
your init argument is a string.
It could also be an NSData,
if you have some large raw data,
we'd map it to NSData,
or a Java byte array.
All right,
let's talk about EORrelationships.
A relationship basically maps a
foreign key into another object.
And we saw earlier how
relationships were formed.
We described them in our diagram view
as arrows from one entity to another.
You've probably seen in other talks
where you match up a foreign key
to a primary key in another table.
When we talk about relationships,
we're talking in EOF about a
one-directional relationship.
So we say to one or to many.
A to one is a relationship where
the destination is a single object.
So in our example,
a course has an instructor.
So the course has a to one
relationship to the instructor.
There's just one
instructor for our course.
A to many relationship is where the
destination is actually an array.
of other objects.
In our example,
a student might be enrolled
in multiple courses,
or a professor might
teach multiple courses.
In those cases, we'll create the array.
We need to know the destination type,
but we'll create an array
of those objects for you.
And typically, EOF works well if there's
an inverse relationship,
so something going back the other way.
There are several places where
EOF wants to figure out how to make an
update going back from the destination
object into the source object.
And it's pretty natural when
you're modeling things to think
of some of these relationships as
a pair of one-way relationships.
So you have an inverse
for most relationships.
But that's not required.
So we have a little diagram
here where you can see the
course has one instructor.
The donuts are the EOs,
and I think that's very common notation,
graphical notation in our documentation.
The arrows represent the relationships.
The little box of two
things is an NSArray,
and you can see how the courses map.
So then advanced relationships,
some other aspects you
can set on a relationship.
The first thing to think
about in your relationship is,
is this optional or mandatory?
Do you require,
to have a fully formed EO,
do you require that it has some
connection across this relationship?
Does there have to be
a destination value,
or can it be null?
If it can be null,
then it's an optional relationship.
If you require that there's some
value there for your business logic,
and just for your,
the semantics of your application,
then it's marked mandatory.
And EOF will enforce that.
If something's marked mandatory,
and for some reason your code or
your user doesn't set a value there,
EOF will raise an exception.
Propagate Primary Key is another
aspect of a relationship.
And what this says is that when
you're inserting a new object at the
destination of this relationship,
It can inherit a primary key
value from the source object.
Now, this is something you
have to think about.
Typically, you want your objects to have
independent primary keys,
but there are some cases where it's very
convenient to propagate the primary key,
especially when we're doing
some kind of correlation table
and setting up a many-to-many,
and we'll show that in our live demo.
The delete rules tell EOF what
to do when you delete an object.
There are a couple of
different possibilities.
We'll talk about those in a minute
when we're showing the live EOModeler.
But you can imagine one possibility
is just to cascade the delete.
If you delete a source object,
you want to follow that relationship,
delete the destination object, and so on.
Another possibility is to nullify.
So if you're deleting
the destination object,
the source object just wants
to get a null marked where
that relationship used to be.
Owns destination implies a
stronger bond between the source
object and the destination object.
In fact,
it's so strong that if the destination
object is not part of this relationship,
it has no reason for being,
and it's going to be
automatically deleted.
This can be very convenient
to keep you from having to
write too much business logic.
If you set a new value for the
destination of some relationship,
the old value will just go away
without any extra code on your part,
if you've marked the
relationship owns destination.
But there are other times where
you don't want to do that.
You don't want to
automatically delete things.
You want to control that,
let that object live
for some other reason.
And finally, batch faulting.
Now we haven't talked about faulting,
but if you've gone to any of the
other EOF talks or maybe some
of the other WebObjects talks,
you may know about faulting already.
And most of you, I think,
have used WebObjects, so you understand.
The idea of faulting is a fault
is kind of a placeholder object.
When we fetch the objects to begin with,
they have relationships to other objects.
We're not going to fetch all of those
objects and recursively load up the whole
database into our editing context memory.
What we do is we fetch the objects
that are immediately desired
from the fetch specification.
Then for all the relationships,
we put in placeholder objects,
which we call faults.
When you touch a fault,
it will magically become
the EO that you want to use.
So your business logic doesn't
have to worry about faults.
But when we're creating these objects,
it's important that they're
marked specially as faults,
and there's some performance
issues about pulling in the faults.
If we touch a fault,
we have to make one round trip to the
database to bring the values back.
It turns out it's very common that when
you touch one fault of a certain type,
your application typically might touch
several other faults of that type.
So to make that perform better,
we have a concept of batch faulting.
You can set on the relationship
how many of these faults you
want to bring back at once,
and we'll make one round
trip to the database,
and maybe you marked it for
10 as your batch faulting.
It's kind of a hint to EOF, "Okay,
if you hit this fault,
bring the next 10 with you." That will
improve performance in many cases.
All right, let's go back to EOModeler.
And we'll take a look at
some of the relationships we
have defined in this model.
Selected student.
A list of relationships here.
First, Advisor is a 2-1 relationship.
Let's inspect that.
So in the inspector we can
see the destination entity
is marked as professor,
it's marked as a 2-1,
and the joins tell us which columns
or which attributes we're going
to use to match up those values.
And you can see how that maps directly
into the SQL we have to generate.
For a 2.1,
the source object holds a foreign
key into the destination object.
So at the destination side
is typically the primary key
is what you want to join on.
All right,
so now this is showing a to-many.
The destination is enrollment.
Enrollment is really a correlation table.
There's not that much
interesting about enrollment,
but it's a way of forming the
many-to-many relationship between
students and the courses they're taking.
So our purpose here is just to form the,
we want to form the to-many.
We're going to use this to
flatten another relationship.
On the student side,
the source for the join is the person ID,
and the destination
side is the student ID.
So the enrollment,
if you think about when
we saw the diagram view,
the enrollment had a 2-1 relationship.
The inverse of this was
back to the student.
So this is a little bit simpler.
We have a definition.
It says to enrollment, dot to course.
So what we're doing is
we're following the first
relationship to the enrollments.
That will get us to an enrollment object.
Then an enrollment object has
another relationship to a course.
By doing this flattened relationship,
we make that jump to
enrollments to course,
and now the to-many relationship
is actually an array of
courses for this student.
So when we're modeling this,
what we cared about were the courses.
We didn't want to think
so much about enrollments.
They're there really just to form the
correlation table to map correctly
into the relational database.
But at our object level,
we want to program and deal in
courses directly from the student.
Okay,
we want to change gears a little bit now,
and we've talked about
what's involved in a model.
Now let's talk about how you
create a model and tables.
So the EOModeler tool can do
what we call reverse engineering.
Reverse engineering is a way
of interrogating the database,
finding out what tables already exist,
and creating the proper entities
and mappings for all the attributes.
We do that automatically for you.
It's a good starting point.
In many applications,
you already have your data.
Someone else has defined
the data for you,
and you're going to put
a web interface on that.
So you want to get access
to the database tables,
reverse engineer.
Maybe you don't need all the tables.
You'll pick a list of the tables
you want to use and let EOModeler
create those entities and attributes.
That's a good starting point.
After you've done that,
you'll want to go inspect your model.
Maybe you don't need all the attributes.
You'll take some out.
Maybe you'll need to form
some other relationships.
You might want to flatten
some relationships.
There's quite a bit you can still
do after you reverse engineered,
but it's a good starting point.
It saves you from having to type a lot
of detail that you already know and has
already been declared in the database.
Now, not everyone wants to
go in that direction.
For some applications, you're in charge.
You get to define the data format.
So you might start with the
EOModel and experiment a bit.
You'll just create some entities,
declare all the information you need,
all the things we've talked about,
especially the attributes
and the external types,
and EOModeler will generate the
SQL that's necessary to create
those corresponding tables.
We'll show you that in a minute.
EOModeler can also create
Java source code for you.
So you've declared your entities,
all your attributes.
Your entities are going to correspond
to a particular class that you
want to use for business logic.
Your attributes map into the
instance fields of that class.
We'll create the basics
of the Java source.
Typically, you'll start with that and
then add more business logic.
And then the other aspect
of EOModeler has a feature
called schema synchronization.
So schema synchronization,
it's a way of matching up what's
in your database to what's
in your model and vice versa.
It gives you some options
about what to do with missing
fields or additional fields.
It's a way of synchronizing
your model with your database.
So, editing a model.
The typical things that you
might want to change in a model.
First of all, switch adapter.
So you've done your application,
you've used one kind of datasource.
Let's say you started with OpenBase,
and for some reason you want to change,
you have another database server,
an Oracle server.
You want to use SwitchAdapter
to modify your model to work
with your new datasource.
In particular, when you do SwitchAdapter,
even if you choose JDBC,
which we'll talk about later,
SwitchAdapter will work
through your model,
all your attributes,
fix up your external types to map
to that particular datasource.
This is important.
In our previous releases,
people would have separate adapters,
an Oracle adapter or a Sybase adapter.
Now we're going to be using one adapter,
but the mechanism for adapting
or changing your model into a new
datasource is still to use SwitchAdapter.
SetAdapterInfo is a simpler operation.
At this point, you're just editing the
connection dictionary.
You're not going to make any other
changes immediately to your model.
So, this can be a little bit
confusing when we're using JDBC.
We'll talk about that in a minute.
If you change your,
if you just use SetAdapterInfo
and change something that's
significant about your datasource,
it would be better to use SwitchAdapter
to make sure that everything
in your model gets changed.
And of course,
when you're editing a model,
as we've seen, there are lots of fields
that you can change.
You make all your changes to your
attributes and your entities.
Just use EOModel.
Click on something,
type something else over it.
That's how you make a change.
And use the inspectors.
There's sometimes more information
available in the inspector than
we can show in the table view.
So that's another way of changing
information about your model.
And the final bullet is
editing fetch specifications.
We have a fetch specification
builder built into EOModeler.
You can associate fetch specifications
directly with an entity,
give it a name, and that's available to
your code at runtime.
And it's a very easy way
to fetch other objects.
You've already set up a fetch
specification or a template
for a fetch specification.
You can use qualifier variables to fetch
particular information that you want.
So we'll look at the fetch
specification builder in a minute.
Okay.
Let's go back to EOModeler.
So as we mentioned, for tables,
we wanted to-- we have course selected.
We want to show the SQL generation panel.
There's a little SQL button.
We'll turn off those two
about dropping tables.
But we're going to slide down here.
You can see we've generated some
SQL to create this table for you.
And then we're also generating some SQL,
in this case to go against Oracle to
create a sequence so that we can create
primary keys using that sequence.
And we have a little code here that's
trying to figure out what the next
value should be in that sequence,
in case you already have
data in your database.
We're not going to do it now,
but there's a button at the bottom
that says to execute the SQL.
That would go create the table.
We already have the table.
If you already have a table created,
Oracle will give you some errors.
They're pretty soft errors,
so you can just continue past that.
The tables button is a convenient way
to check what's already in my database.
And if you wanted to create something,
you can see it kind of reinforces
that things worked correctly
if you click on that tables
button and just get your list.
When you're dealing with Oracle,
of course, these tables belong to the
particular user that logged in.
Different databases will have different
ways of deciding what the table space is.
Okay, so that gives you a general idea
of what you can do for creating,
and we talked earlier about
reverse engineering tables.
All right,
let's get back and talk a little
bit about EOFET specification.
So, you use a fetch specification
when you want to get data out
of your database and create EOs.
It fetches objects from the database
into your editing context by using,
by filtering according to the
EOQualifier that you assign
to your fetch specification.
And the EOQualifier,
I think you've seen in
the introduction to EOF,
how you form an EOQualifier.
It's a query language that's a simple
kind of object-oriented query language.
You can use key value coding,
have key paths involved
in your qualifier.
So we'll do the joins across multiple
tables for you automatically.
You don't have to think too much
about where all your data is located.
Just work at the object level,
crossing relationships,
and referring to attributes
by their key name.
One thing you can set on a
fetch specification is the
notion of is it deep or not.
And this has to do with when
we're using entity inheritance.
A deep fetch specification
will fetch not only the entity
that it's been assigned to,
but also all the subentities.
So in our case,
we had person as the parent
class for professor and student.
So if you try to fetch person,
we'll fetch all the persons,
we'll fetch all the professors,
and fetch all the students.
And then we'll filter according
to whatever your qualifier is.
We also use fetch specifications
for shared objects.
In the EO Entity Inspector,
you can see where you can mark whether
or not you want to move objects
into the shared editing context
when you first load up this model.
I think we'll talk about this in the
advanced EOF session later today.
I think that begins at 3.30.
So if you're using shared objects,
you'll want to use a
named fetch specification.
You might want to share all
the objects of this entity,
or you might want to filter that and
use a fetch specification just to get
certain objects moved automatically
into the shared editing context.
And finally, we have inside EOModeler,
there's a Fetch Specification Builder,
and we'll take a look at that.
Select Professor.
If you hit the little plus sign there,
it expands the professor.
You can see all the relationships
below it and the stored procedures.
So the stored procedure has
a slightly different icon.
By clicking on that,
we're showing the Fetch
Specification Builder.
And we have a Fetch
Specification already there.
We want to browse.
Let's browse data and
see what we get back.
So this was a very simple
Fetch Specification.
We just wanted to see all the
professors whose name began with J.
So we can change that easily.
We'll close that if you want to...
You can edit that, let's say we want a W.
You can put whatever you want
in there and go browse again.
This is an easy way to test your fetch
specification right there in the builder.
Let's take a look at some of the other
tabs in the Fetch Specification Builder.
We talked about Fetch Specifications
in some of our other EOF talks.
The sort ordering allows you to choose
how your results are going to be ordered.
So you might order by name, in this case,
office, location, whatever.
You can choose several of these different
attributes and we'll order on those.
You can even follow a key path
and we'll order according to
the results in that key path.
The next tab is prefetching.
Now the idea here is when we're fetching
some objects with a fetch specification,
there are some related objects
that we might know because of our
application logic that we're likely
to touch these other objects.
So I told you before that
normally when we fetch an object,
we create a fault for the relationships.
If you set up prefetching, you can say,
well, I really know I'm going
to need that object,
so don't just make a fault.
On some of these objects,
we want you to prefetch,
we want you to go get the real
object so we have that in memory
as a result of this one fetch.
We might actually have to go to
the database a couple of times,
but we can group things and give
you a bit better performance if
you have prefetching turned on
for things that you actually need.
And that, again,
would be following some kind
of relationship and saying,
get me that object at the end of
this relationship whenever you
fetch this fetch specification.
[Transcript missing]
and you can decide which
attributes to fetch.
We have a couple of choices there,
whether we fetch all of the attributes
as raw rows or we just fetch a certain
set of the attributes as raw rows.
But the usual thing is most of the
time you want to fetch enterprise
objects and have EOF do the special
work to keep track of those objects
for you so you don't have to think
about updating your database.
You just change the object, save changes,
and everything happens magically.
The next panel, options.
All right,
so there's a couple of extra options
you can set on a fetch specification.
First thing is a fetch limit.
How many rows?
There might be a case where you
only want to get so many rows,
you're not sure how many are out there,
but let's stop at some limit.
When you're doing desktop applications,
it makes sense to prompt on a limit.
You might pull back the first
100 rows and let the user decide,
okay, I'll get the next 100.
These other things about
doing deep inheritance fetch,
fetching distinct rows,
basically adds distinct when
we're generating the SQL,
we'll add a distinct so you don't
get duplicates in your result set.
We can lock the objects.
I don't recommend you use that,
but if you're,
especially if you're doing a
desktop kind of application,
you really know you own the database.
You can lock the database,
the objects in the database
whenever you fetch them.
If you're doing a web application,
you don't want to do that.
It's going to hurt performance and
it'll cause you other problems.
So don't, don't lock your fetch
specifications in general,
but if you know that you need it,
it's there.
Refresh refetched objects.
Usually, if EOF already has an object and
you run another fetch specification,
getting back that same object,
EOF won't do anything
special because it says,
we already have that.
It's in our cache.
If you set this,
then what you're telling EOF is, well,
when you fetch this fetch
specification for me,
even if I've already seen these
objects and think I know about them,
I want you to refresh them,
give me whatever's in the database
instead of what I already have in memory.
And finally,
require all variable bindings.
We didn't talk so much
about variable bindings.
In the other introduction to EOF talk,
they discussed variable bindings.
But you can set placeholder variables
in your fetch specifications.
So they're not fully
formed at this point,
but you're going to do a
binding using your code.
You'll set up a dictionary to bind those
query or qualifier variables and create
a new fetch specification at runtime.
So that can be really convenient to use
the fetch specification as a template
for other fetches that you want to do.
Okay, and then the final
panel is the SQL panel.
And in this case,
we can see the raw SQL that's
going to be generated.
You can decide for a
complicated fetch specification,
you could say, well, you know,
I could optimize that.
I could write better SQL than EOF.
So if you can do that,
then you say use the raw SQL expression.
You give us an expression.
It has to return the result set the
same way EOF would have returned it.
I don't recommend you do this
unless you really know that you
can get the best result and it's
much better than EOF can do.
This is hard to maintain.
When you change your objects,
EOF will do the right thing with
all your fetch specifications.
But, you know,
your raw SQL won't know the difference.
And you can also mark stored
procedures to use to do your fetch.
Instead of doing SQL at all,
you might call a stored procedure.
Alright, we need to talk quickly
about inheritance.
There's three kinds of inheritance.
We're talking about entities that
are inheriting from other entities.
As we've already
indicated in our example,
we have a generic person,
and then professor and student
both inherit from person.
So, vertical inheritance.
For vertical inheritance,
at the database level,
we're mapping all the columns that
are common into the superclass.
So we have one table for person,
which is holding the
person ID in the last.
Then we're creating for a professor,
which is a subentity of person,
we have another database table,
the professor table.
It has just the attributes
that are special to professor.
It also has to have the same primary key
so we can match those up and do a join.
But what's special for a professor
is that he has an office.
Student, what's special about a student
is he has this advisor ID in
the middle of the table.
So he can see what's
going on in the table.
the database we're going to use that as
the foreign key to map to our advisor
object so for vertical inheritance
which is kind of the most natural if
you're coming from an object or a point
of view everything that's common is in
the superclass and then things that are
specific are mapped to specific tables
we have to do a join to create a real
eo so we want to fetch a particular
professor we have to fetch the parts
of the professor that are stored in the
person table and then the parts that are
stored in the professor table join those
up to make one EO for the professor.
Another way to do inheritance is
to push those common attributes
down into the other tables.
So at this point,
we call it horizontal inheritance.
We've taken things that were vertical,
pushed them down into, in this case,
the professor table.
Now it has everything
associated with a professor.
So it has the person ID, the last name,
and the office, all in that one table.
So now if we're fetching a professor,
we only have to fetch
against that one table.
If we're fetching a student,
we have a separate student table.
He has a person ID, last name,
those are the common parts,
and then he has a special advisor ID.
Again, it's in that one table.
If we're doing a deep fetch on person,
which is,
now we're going to mark person abstract,
we might have had persons
that weren't abstract.
In our example, person's abstract,
so we don't have to worry about
actually hitting a person table.
If you might have generic persons,
then we'd have to fetch
against that table first,
then we'd have to fetch each of
the subentities individually,
and join all those results
back to do a deep fetch.
So that again could be a bit slower.
A special case of inheritance is what
we call single table inheritance.
In this case,
we make one database table with the
union of all the attributes that
might be anywhere in this hierarchy.
By doing this, we can do a deep fetch by
using one select statement
against the database table.
And then EOF has to figure out,
as we're pulling rows back, well,
is this a professor, is this a student,
maybe this is a generic person.
We can do that one select,
pull them back,
and figure out which ones they are,
give you your result set.
So if you're doing inheritance
and you don't have too complicated
of an inheritance hierarchy,
I recommend you use single table
inheritance for performance reasons.
You will have to leave some columns null,
right, because even though the student
has a row in the database,
the student doesn't have an office.
So that would have to be
null for that student.
So you need to have a little
bit of flexibility in how you're
defining your table in order to
make single table inheritance work.
We've also added an extra column called
ptype that's special for the database.
That's special for
single table inheritance.
We're using ptype to declare exactly
what type of value we have in that row.
So we're using a 1 to be a professor,
a 2 to be a student.
EOF needs some kind of restricting
qualifier that we talked about
earlier to know exactly how to
create the right kind of EO for you.
Okay, we're going to go back to the demo,
and I think we have
to be very brief here.
I think actually since
we're running low on time,
I want to save time for questions.
So we'll just show this to you quickly
and then I think we'll end after that.
So we can see here,
Ernest has brought up two different
viewers on the same model.
And you can see person has the
common types just like our graph.
The student has one extra attribute,
advisor.
The other things that are common
to the superclass are actually,
the other attributes are written in
italic type to suggest that you're
inheriting these from the person.
So let's just inspect student.
So in this inspector,
the important thing is
restricting qualifier,
ptype equals 2.
That's how we distinguish.
We're in single table.
We pull an individual row out.
What kind of EO should we create?
We're going to use that ptype
equal 2 restricting qualifier
to know this thing is a student.
It's not an generic person.
It's not a professor.
And you can see the parent
was marked as a person.
So that's how we're determining
what we're inheriting from.
You only had to add the advisor.
You didn't have to declare
all those other attributes.
So maybe we can just,
let's just browse person
and that will finish it.
So if we browse data for person,
you can see everything's
stored in one database table.
The p-type column is different.
Worcester and Jeeves
are actually professors,
they're type 1,
and Fink-Nottle and Little are students,
they're type 2.
Okay, I think I'm gonna wrap up here.
There's more you can do with EOModeler.
I'm going to be in the lab after
the talk and we'll have other people
in the lab all during the day,
so you can come experiment with models
and ask particular questions about
how you want to model certain objects.
Can we go back to the slides, please?
Okay.
We've run late, so I have to whiz through
the adapter information.
The important thing to
know is for WebObjects 5,
the JDBC adapter is the adapter.
This is the one we're giving you.
The nice thing about JDBC is it gets
to all kinds of different databases.
We have...
We have great connectivity
because we're using JDBC.
Almost every database vendor
is delivering a JDBC driver.
We can talk to that.
We've done specific work
with Oracle and OpenBase,
but other things can be
added to our JDBC adapter.
One thing about JDBC,
JDBC doesn't really stand for anything.
It's just a bunch of letters
that Sun had trademarked,
but you can think of it as ODBC for Java.
So in your connection dictionary,
the important thing is to set a JDBC URL.
That's determined by your
database vendor or the particular
JDBC driver you're using.
You need to know the details of that,
and that can be a little bit complicated.
We have two examples here
of Oracle and OpenBase.
If you're using some other driver,
figure out from the documentation
how you want to address that.
Our plugin is our way of adding
special behavior that works
for that particular datasource.
By default,
we'll guess it by looking at the
subprotocol in your JDBC URL.
And you can programmatically
decide to use certain plugins
for a subprotocol name.
So you have some control of
that in your application.
The driver, again,
we'll try to guess that.
If you're using Oracle,
we'll guess the right plugin.
The plugin will guess which
driver to try to load.
You have to make sure that
driver is available at runtime,
and the easiest place to do that is to
put it into your Java VM's X directory.
So on MacOSX,
that would be in library/java/home/lib/x.
This is documented on different
platforms where you can put these things.
You can put it in your
class path anywhere.
Just make it available at runtime.
We can experiment with models
and if we don't have time
for all the questions here,
I'll be in the lab after this talk.
So the other talks that
are coming up today,
DirectWeb's right after this,
the Advanced Enterprise Objects Framework
is a really good talk if you want to
get more into advanced topics in EUF.